API gateway docs (#11951)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/api-gateway.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: API Gateway
description: Using Consul API gateway functionality
---

# Consul API Gateway

This topic describes how to use the Consul API Gateway module, which enables applications and services running in a datacenter to be accessed by network clients outside the datacenter. This type of network traffic is commonly referred to as "north-south" network traffic.

## Introduction

Consul API Gateway is an implementation of the Kubernetes Gateway [API Specification](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/). The specification defines a set of custom resource definitions (CRD) that can create logical gateways and routes.

## Requirements

Your datacenter must meet the following requirements prior to configuring the Consul API Gateway:

> - A Kubernetes cluster must be running

Reviewer: Suggestion for less redundancy (the word "must" in the requirements section)
```suggestion
- A running Kubernetes cluster
```

- Consul 1.11.1+

## Installation

> 1. Create a values file for your Consul server agents that contains the following parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a values file for your Consul helm chart definition that contains the following parameters:
```

>    ```yaml

Reviewer: Adding the codeblocks config to specify that the filename we are using for this is `values.yaml`

```suggestion
<CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard filename="values.yaml">

   ```yaml
```

   global:
     name: consul
     image: 'hashicorp/consul:1.11.1'
     tls:
       enabled: true
   connectInject:
     enabled: true
   controller:
     enabled: true
   ```

> 

Reviewer: Github won't let me add the CodeBlock config closing this here..  so annoying. Here's what you'd have to add here.. 

`</CodeBlockConfig>`

1. Install Consul API Gateway using the standard Consul Helm chart and specify the custom values file.

```shell-session
$ helm install consul hashicorp/consul --version 0.39.0 -f values.yaml
```

> The following components will be installed: - Gateway controller - CRDs required by the Kubernetes Gateway API specification - `kustomize` manifests for completing the installation

Reviewer: Breaking the list out into multiple lines to make more readable.
```suggestion
The following components will be installed: 
- Gateway controller 
- CRDs required by the Kubernetes Gateway API specification 
- `kustomize` manifests for completing the installation
```

> 1. After `helm` installs Consul API Gateway packages, issue the following commands to apply the API gateway to your Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: This CRD creation and deployment step may be integrated into the Helm chart before the release [Slack thread](https://hashicorp.slack.com/archives/C01RWVBQ6GJ/p1642000326061100).. if it is, then these step can be completely removed from your docs and the Learn guide.

Reviewer 2: @nickethier Is this something you'd be able to update with the Helm install instructions?

```shell-session
$ kubectl apply -k "github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/config/crd?ref=v0.1.0-techpreview"
$ kubectl apply -k "github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/config?ref=v0.1.0-techpreview"
```

## Usage

> 1. Verify that the [requirements](#requirements) have been met.
> 1. Verify that the Consul API Gateway software has been installed and applied (see [Installation](#installation)).

Reviewer: I think it's fair to assume if readers have been reading and working through this doc (and any of our docs), these have been completed, therefore these items could be removed.
```suggestion
```

Author: I'm sure you're right, but I'm trying to be consistent about the functionalities I'm documenting moving forward and include steps/checklists, even if it's obvious.

> 1. Configure the gateway, listener(s), and route(s) as described in [Configuration](#configuration)

Author: I think that's a good call for tutorials where the sequence has to be precise. The template I'm trying to institute is to describe the procedure as concisely as possible and link to large sets of details--almost like an appendix--so that readers flow isn't interrupted as they're taking in a potentially new concept.

1. Issue the `kubectl apply` command to implement the configurations, e.g.:

```shell-session
$ kubectl apply -f gateway-configuration.yaml
```

### Using the Consul API Gateway Binary

> You can manually start the Consul API Gateway control plane server using the binary located in the home directory to issue the `server` command:

Reviewer: Your other steps do a great job of walking through the creation then usage of YAML files, but this one has been confused cuz I've never heard of the Consul API Gateway Binary up until this point. It looks like we're running some kind of script from a home directory, but I don't have the script or understand where or why I'm issuing this command.

Author: Thanks, I'll try to make this clearer up front

| `-pprof`               | Integer value that specifies the Go pprof port number for collecting metrics.                                                                                                         | Optional | none                                                                    |
| `-sds-server-host`     | String value that specifies the host server for the secret discovery service (SDS).                                                                                                   | Optional | `consul-api-gateway-controller.default.`<br/>`svc.cluster.`<br/>`local` |
| `-sds-server-host`     | Integer value that specifies the port number for the secret discovery service (SDS).                                                                                                  | Optional | `9090`                                                                  |

You can also issue the `version` command to print the Consul API Gateway version to the console:

```shell-session
$ ./consul-api-gateway version
consul-api-gateway 0.1.0-dev
```

> ## Configuration

Reviewer: As mentioned above, this section could work better before the Usage section.

# Consul API Gateway

This topic describes how to use the Consul API Gateway module, which enables applications and services running in a datacenter to be accessed by network clients outside the datacenter. This type of network traffic is commonly referred to as "north-south" network traffic.

## Introduction

Consul API Gateway is an implementation of the Kubernetes Gateway [API Specification](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/). The specification defines a set of custom resource definitions (CRD) that can create logical gateways and routes.

## Requirements

Your datacenter must meet the following requirements prior to configuring the Consul API Gateway:

- A running Kubernetes cluster
- Consul 1.11.2+

## Installation

1. Create a values file for your Consul helm chart definition that contains the following parameters:

<CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard filename="values.yaml">

   ```yaml
   global:
     name: consul
     image: 'hashicorp/consul:1.11.2'
     tls:
       enabled: true
   connectInject:
     enabled: true
   controller:
     enabled: true
   ```

1. Install Consul API Gateway using the standard Consul Helm chart and specify the custom values file.

```shell-session

> $ helm install consul hashicorp/consul --version 0.39.0 -f values.yaml

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
$ helm install consul hashicorp/consul --version 0.39.0 --values values.yaml
```
A recent PR updated all of the example commands to use the long form for CLI flags per the recommendation from our style guide. I recommend changing this for consistency.

```

The following components will be installed: 
- Gateway controller 
- CRDs required by the Kubernetes Gateway API specification 
- `kustomize` manifests for completing the installation

1. After `helm` installs Consul API Gateway packages, issue the following commands to apply the API gateway to your Kubernetes cluster.

```shell-session

> $ kubectl apply -k "github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/config/crd?ref=v0.1.0-beta"
> $ kubectl apply -k "github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/config?ref=v0.1.0-beta"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
$ kubectl apply --kustomize="github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/config/crd?ref=v0.1.0-beta"
$ kubectl apply --kustomize="github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/config?ref=v0.1.0-beta"
```

```

## Usage

1. Verify that the [requirements](#requirements) have been met.
1. Verify that the Consul API Gateway software has been installed and applied (see [Installation](#installation)).
1. Configure the gateway, listener(s), and route(s) as described in [Configuration](#configuration)
1. Issue the `kubectl apply` command to implement the configurations, e.g.:

```shell-session

> $ kubectl apply -f gateway-configuration.yaml

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
$ kubectl apply --filename gateway-configuration.yaml
```

Create the following artifacts to configure the API Gateway:

- [Gateway](#gateway): Defines the gateway properties, including listeners.
- [Listeners](#listeners): Defines listener properties, such as protocol, port, and namespace.
- [Routes](#routes): Specifies the path from the client to the listener.

### Gateway

The gateway object contains gateway listeners.
Add the `kind: Gateway` option to the configuration file to declare a gateway.
The following example creates a gateway called `example-gateway` that includes a listener called `https` (see [Listeners](#listeners) for details about the `listener` configuration).

<CodeBlockConfig lineNumbers highlight="2,4,9,13">

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: example-gateway
  annotations:
    'external-dns.alpha.kubernetes.io/hostname': DNS_HOSTNAME
spec:
  gatewayClassName: default-consul-gateway-class
  listeners:
    - protocol: HTTPS
      hostname: DNS_HOSTNAME
      port: 443
      name: https
      allowedRoutes:
        namespaces:
          from: Same
      tls:
        certificateRefs:
          - name: gateway-production-certificate
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

> Refer to the Kubernetes Gateway API documentation for details about configuring gateways:
> https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.Gateway

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Refer to the Kubernetes Gateway API documentation for details about configuring gateways:
<https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.Gateway>.
```
It is recommended that bare URLs be surrounded by angle brackets.

- <https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#urls-and-email-addresses>
- <https://github.com/updownpress/markdown-lint/blob/master/rules/034-no-bare-urls.md>

### Listeners

Listeners are the logical endpoints bound to the gateway's addresses.
Add the `listener` object to the `gateway` configuration and specify the following properties to define a listener:

- `hostname`: Hostname specifies the virtual hostname to match for protocol types.
- `port`: Specifies the network port.
- `protocol`: Specifies the network protocol expected by the listener.

Refer to the Kubernetes Gateway API documentation for details about configuring listeners:

> https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.Listener

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.Listener>.
```

---
layout: docs
page_title: API Gateway
description: Using Consul API gateway functionality
---
# Consul API Gateway

The Consul API Gateway add-on module helps users control access to services running within a Consul service mesh. Using the API Gateway, applications and services running in a Consul datacenter can be accessed by network clients residing outside of the datacenter. This type of network traffic is commonly referred to as "north-south" network traffic as it refers to the flow of data into and out of a specific environment. Requests from clients can also be forwarded based on path or request protocol. 

> ## Introduction

Reviewer 4: Jeff and I re-wrote this section to add a little more meat to it.

  </CodeBlockConfig>

1. Install Consul API Gateway using the standard Consul Helm chart and specify the custom values file.

```shell-session
$ helm install consul hashicorp/consul --version 0.39.0 --values values.yaml
```

The following components will be installed: - Gateway controller - CRDs required by the Kubernetes Gateway API specification - `kustomize` manifests for completing the installation

1. After `helm` installs Consul API Gateway packages, issue the following commands to apply the API gateway to your Kubernetes cluster.

```shell-session
$ kubectl apply --kustomize="github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/config/crd?ref=v0.1.0-beta"
$ kubectl apply --kustomize="github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/config?ref=v0.1.0-beta"
```

## Usage

1. Verify that the [requirements](#requirements) have been met.
1. Verify that the Consul API Gateway software has been installed and applied (see [Installation](#installation)).
1. Configure the gateway, listener(s), and route(s) as described in [Configuration](#configuration)
1. Issue the `kubectl apply` command to implement the configurations, e.g.:

```shell-session
$ kubectl apply --values gateway-configuration.yaml
```

> ### Using the Consul API Gateway Binary

Reviewer 5: I would just consider dropping this section for now. We really only support tight kubernetes integration at the moment in which case you'll need to jump through the hoops of manually setting up a kubernetes authentication context for the binary and make sure the host you're running it on is routable from all potential kubernetes worker nodes. No one should really be running that in a production setup.

Once we have support for other runtimes (i.e. potentially something like a standalone runtime), invoking this directly or running it as part of a kubernetes installation may make sense, but for now, it doesn't.

Author: Commented out

| `-sds-server-host`     | String value that specifies the host server for the secret discovery service (SDS).                                                                                                   | Optional | `consul-api-gateway-controller.default.`<br/>`svc.cluster.`<br/>`local` |
| `-sds-server-host`     | Integer value that specifies the port number for the secret discovery service (SDS).                                                                                                  | Optional | `9090`                                                                  |

You can also issue the `version` command to print the Consul API Gateway version to the console:

```shell-session
$ ./consul-api-gateway version
consul-api-gateway 0.1.0
```

## Configuration

Create the following artifacts to configure the API Gateway:

- [Gateway](#gateway): Defines the gateway properties, including listeners.
- [Listeners](#listeners): Defines listener properties, such as protocol, port, and namespace.
- [Routes](#routes): Specifies the path from the client to the listener.

> ### Gateway

Reviewer 5: We should add a section on `GatewayClass`/`GatewayClassConfig` here -- the installation process will install some default stuff, but the `GatewayClassConfig` is implementation-specific, so if not here it won't be documented anywhere else.

<CodeBlockConfig lineNumbers highlight="2,4,9,13">

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: example-gateway
  annotations:
    'external-dns.alpha.kubernetes.io/hostname': DNS_HOSTNAME
spec:
  gatewayClassName: default-consul-gateway-class
  listeners:
    - protocol: HTTPS
      hostname: DNS_HOSTNAME
      port: 443
      name: https
      allowedRoutes:
        namespaces:
          from: Same
      tls:
        certificateRefs:
          - name: gateway-production-certificate
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

Refer to the Kubernetes Gateway API documentation for details about configuring gateways:
<https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.Gateway>

### Listeners

Listeners are the logical endpoints bound to the gateway's addresses.
Add the `listener` object to the `gateway` configuration and specify the following properties to define a listener:

- `hostname`: Hostname specifies the virtual hostname to match for protocol types.
- `port`: Specifies the network port.

> - `protocol`: Specifies the network protocol expected by the listener.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `protocol`: Specifies the network protocol expected by the listener.
- `tls` [`GatewayTLSConfig`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.GatewayTLSConfig)
  - `mode` [`TLSModeType`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.TLSModeType): Defaults to `Terminate` if unspecified, `Passthrough` is not yet supported.
  - `certificateRefs` [`[]*SecretObjectReference`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.SecretObjectReference): Used for Envoy SDS (Secret Discovery Service) to support terminating TLS.
  - `options`:  Key/value pairs to enable implementation-specific extended TLS configuration. Consul API Gateway supports the following options:
    - `"api-gateway.consul.hashicorp.com/tls_min_version"`: Set the minimum TLS version supported for this listener. Allowed values are `TLS_AUTO`, `TLSv1_0`, `TLSv1_1`, `TLSv1_2`, `TLSv1_3`. If unspecified, Consul API Gateway will default to TLS 1.2.
    - `"api-gateway.consul.hashicorp.com/tls_max_version"`: Set the maximum TLS version supported for this listener. Must be greater than or equal to `TLSMinVersion`. Allowed values are `TLS_AUTO`, `TLSv1_0`, `TLSv1_1`, `TLSv1_2`, or `TLSv1_3`. If unspecified, Consul API Gateway will use Envoy's current default of TLS 1.3.
    - `"api-gateway.consul.hashicorp.com/tls_cipher_suites"`: Set the list of TLS cipher suites to support when negotiating connections using TLS 1.2 or earlier. If unspecified, Consul API Gateway will set a [more secure set of cipher suites](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/blob/main/internal/common/tls.go#L3-L10) than Envoy's current [default server cipher list](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/extensions/transport_sockets/tls/v3/common.proto#envoy-v3-api-field-extensions-transport-sockets-tls-v3-tlsparameters-cipher-suites). The full list of supported cipher suites can seen in [`internal/common/tls.go`](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/blob/main/internal/common/tls.go) and is dependent on underlying support in Envoy. Future releases of Envoy may remove currently-supported but insecure cipher suites, and future releases of Consul API Gateway may add new supported cipher suites if any are added to Envoy.
```

Pulled most of this content from parallel Consul core ingress gateway docs added in https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/pull/12163 with specific tweaks to note where Consul API Gateway sets more secure default values.

Refer to the Kubernetes Gateway API documentation for details about configuring listeners:

> <https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.Listener>

Reviewer 5: Since the listener options are implementation-specific, we should probably document the TLS options here, right @mikemorris?

Reviewer 2: Added suggestion in https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/pull/11951/files/8c2399a862aa75b025aa0e5788ac507e13d8aa08#r793110671

---
layout: docs
page_title: API Gateway
description: Using Consul API gateway functionality
---

# Consul API Gateway

This topic describes how to use the Consul API Gateway add-on module, which helps users control access to services running within a Consul service mesh. The API gateway enables external network clients to access applications and services running in a Consul datacenter. This type of network traffic is commonly referred to as "north-south" network traffic as it refers to the flow of data into and out of a specific environment. Requests from clients can also be forwarded based on path or request protocol.

## Introduction

> Consul API Gateway is an implementation of the Kubernetes Gateway [API Specification](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/). This specification defines a set of custom resource definitions (CRD) that can create logical gateways and routes based on the path or protocol of a client request. Consul API Gateway solves two primary use cases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consul API Gateway is an implementation of the Kubernetes [Gateway API Specification](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/). This specification defines a set of custom resource definitions (CRD) that can create logical gateways and routes based on the path or protocol of a client request. Consul API Gateway solves two primary use cases:
```

> - **Controlling access at the point entry**: Consul API Gateway allows users to set the protocols of external connection requests and provide clients with TLS certificates from trusted providers (e.g., VeriSign, Let’sEncrypt).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Controlling access at the point of entry**: Consul API Gateway allows users to set the protocols of external connection requests and provide clients with TLS certificates from trusted providers (e.g., VeriSign, Let’sEncrypt).
```

| `-sds-server-host`     | Integer value that specifies the port number for the secret discovery service (SDS).                                                                                                  | Optional | `9090`                                                                  |

You can also issue the `version` command to print the Consul API Gateway version to the console:

```shell-session
$ ./consul-api-gateway version
consul-api-gateway 0.1.0
```
--->

## Configuration

Configure the following artifacts to facilitate ingress into your Consul service mesh:

- [Gateway](#gateway): Defines the main infrastructure resource that links API gateway components. It specifies the name of the `GatewayClass` and one or more `listeners`.
- [GatewayClass](#gatewayclass): Defines a class of gateway resources that you can use as a template for creating gateways.
- [GatewayClassConfig](#gatewayclassconfig): Describes additional Consul API Gatway-related configuration parameters for the `GatewayClass` resource.

> - [Listeners](#listeners): Defines listener properties, such as protocol, port, and namespace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Listeners](#listeners): Defines listener properties, such as protocol, port, and TLS options.
```
As listeners are part of a gateway, I'm pretty sure namespace can only be specified in the metadata for Gateway and GatewayClass given that we don't yet support cross-namespace routing.

> - [Gateway](#gateway): Defines the main infrastructure resource that links API gateway components. It specifies the name of the `GatewayClass` and one or more `listeners`.
> - [GatewayClass](#gatewayclass): Defines a class of gateway resources that you can use as a template for creating gateways.
> - [GatewayClassConfig](#gatewayclassconfig): Describes additional Consul API Gatway-related configuration parameters for the `GatewayClass` resource.
> - [Listeners](#listeners): Defines listener properties, such as protocol, port, and namespace.
> - [Routes](#routes): Specifies the path from the client to the listener.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [GatewayClassConfig](#gatewayclassconfig): Describes additional Consul API Gatway-related configuration parameters for the `GatewayClass` resource.
- [GatewayClass](#gatewayclass): Defines a class of gateway resources that you can use as a template for creating gateways.
- [Gateway](#gateway): Defines the main infrastructure resource that links API gateway components. It specifies the name of the `GatewayClass` and one or more `listeners`.
- [Listeners](#listeners): Defines listener properties, such as protocol, port, and namespace.
- [Routes](#routes): Specifies the path from the client to the listener.
```

I would order these by the hierarchy that they actually get used in, seeing as `Gateway`s get configured by pre-existing `GatewayClassConfig`s and associated with a configuration/our controller via the `GatewayClass`.

Also, may want to consider dropping or re-wording `Listeners` here, unlike all of the other entities here they aren't "distinct", they're a part of the `Gateway` configuration itself (a `listeners` sub-section of a `Gateway` object) v. a separate object.

Add the `kind: Gateway` option to the configuration file to declare a gateway.
The following example creates a gateway called `example-gateway`.
The gateway is based on the `test-gateway-class` and includes a listener called `https` (see [Listeners](#listeners) for details about the `listener` configuration).

<CodeBlockConfig filename="gateway.yaml" lineNumbers highlight="2,4,8,9,13">

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: example-gateway
  annotations:
    'external-dns.alpha.kubernetes.io/hostname': DNS_HOSTNAME
spec:
  gatewayClassName: test-gateway-class
  listeners:
    - protocol: HTTPS
      hostname: DNS_HOSTNAME
      port: 443
      name: https
      allowedRoutes:
        namespaces:
          from: Same
      tls:
        certificateRefs:
          - name: gateway-production-certificate
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

Refer to the Kubernetes Gateway API documentation for details about configuring gateways:
<https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.Gateway>

### GatewayClass

The `GatewayClass` resource is used as a template for creating `Gateway` resources.

> The specification includes the name of the controller (`controllerName`) and an API object containing controller-specific configuration resource within the cluster (`parametersRef`).

Reviewer 5: We may want to add that the value `'hashicorp.com/consul-api-gateway-controller'` is required for `controllerName`, as that is what tells our controller we own the `Gateway` objects associated with this `GatewayClass`.

When gateways are created from a `GatewayClass`, they use the parameters specified in the `GatewayClass` at the time of instantiation.

> If you want to propagate changes made to the `GatewayClass` after gateways have been created, then the implementation must document this behavior.
> The `gateway-exists-finalizer.gateway.networking.k8s.io` finalizer must also be added to a `GatewayClass` to ensure that a `GatewayClass` associated with a `Gateway` is not deleted while in use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

These are notes for implementing engineers (like our Consul API Gateway engineering team), not end-users. @andrewstucki @nickethier do we propagate any changes from the `GatewayClass` after gateways have been created? That may be worth documenting here.

Add the `kind: GatewayClass` option to the the gateway values file to declare a gateway class.
The following example creates a gateway class called `test-gateway-class`.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="gateway.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  name: test-gateway-class
spec:
  controllerName: 'hashicorp.com/consul-api-gateway-controller'
  parametersRef:
    group: api-gateway.consul.hashicorp.com
    kind: GatewayClassConfig
    name: test-gateway-class-config
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

Refer to the Kubernetes Gateway API documentation for details about configuring gateway classes:
<https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.GatewayClass>

> ### GatewayClassConfig

Reviewer 5: similar to the above comment, I'd organize these in the order that they need to be understood/created.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="gateway.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: api-gateway.consul.hashicorp.com/v1alpha1
kind: GatewayClassConfig
metadata:
  name: test-gateway-class-config
spec:
  useHostPorts: true
  logLevel: trace
  consul:
    scheme: https
    caSecret: consul-ca-cert
    ports:
      http: 8501
      grpc: 8502
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

The following table describes the required parameters for the `spec` array:

| Parameter      | Description                                                                                                                                          | Type    | Default |
| -------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------- | ------- |
| `useHostPorts` | Enables the gateway to use the host ports                                                                                                            | Boolean | `true`  |
| `logLevel`     | Specifies the error reporting level for logs. You can specify the following values: `FATAL`, `ERROR`, `WARN`, `INFO`, `DEBUG`, `TRACE`, `ALL`, `OFF` | String  | `trace` |

> | `consul`       | Specifies ingress properties for Consul. See [Consul Configuration](#consul-configuration)                                                           | Array   | N/A     |

Reviewer 5: Here's the list taken from https://github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/blob/main/config/crd/bases/api-gateway.consul.hashicorp.com_gatewayclassconfigs.yaml which we may want to link to

| Parameter      | Description                                                                                                                                          | Type    | Default |
| -------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------- | ------- |
| `consul.address` | The address of the consul server to communicate with in the gateway pod. If not specified, the pod will attempt to use a local agent on the host on which it is running. | String | N/A |
| `consul.authentication.account` | The Kubernetes service account to authenticate as. | String | N/A |
| `consul.authentication.managed` | Whether deployments should be run with "managed" service accounts created by the gateway controller. When this option is specified `consul.authentication.account` is ignored. | Boolean | `false` |
| `consul.authentication.method` | The Consul auth method used for initial authentication by consul-api-gateway. | String | N/A |
| `consul.authentication.namespace` | The Consul namespace to use for authentication. | String | N/A |
| `consul.ports.grpc` | The grpc port for Consul's xDS server. | Integer | `8502` |
| `consul.ports.http` | The port for Consul's HTTP server. | Integer | `8500` |
| `consul.scheme` | The scheme to use for connecting to Consul. Either "http" or "https" | String | `"http"` |
| `copyAnnotations.service` | List of annotations to copy to the gateway service. | Array | `["external-dns.alpha.kubernetes.io/hostname"]` |
| `image.consulAPIGateway` | The image to use for consul-api-gateway. | String | `"hashicorp/consul-api-gateway:RELEASE_VERSION"` |
| `image.envoy` | The image to use for Envoy. | String | `"envoyproxy/envoy:v1.19-latest"` |
| `logLevel` | Logging levels. One of "trace", "debug", "info", "warning", or "error". | String | `"info"` |
| `nodeSelector` | NodeSelector is a selector which must be true for the pod to fit on a node. Selector which must match a node's labels for the pod to be scheduled on that node. More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/assign-pod-node/ | Object | N/A |
| `serviceType` | Service Type string describes ingress methods for a service. One of "ClusterIP", "NodePort", or "LoadBalancer". | String | N/A |
| `useHostPorts` | If this is set, then the Envoy container ports are mapped to host ports. | Boolean | `false` |

If you want to separate the segments into their own configuration sections, just explode them by the `.`.

---
layout: docs
page_title: API Gateway
description: Using Consul API gateway functionality
---

# Consul API Gateway

This topic describes how to use the Consul API Gateway add-on module, which helps users control access to services running within a Consul service mesh. The API gateway enables external network clients to access applications and services running in a Consul datacenter. This type of network traffic is commonly referred to as "north-south" network traffic as it refers to the flow of data into and out of a specific environment. Requests from clients can also be forwarded based on path or request protocol.

## Introduction

> Consul API Gateway is an implementation of the Kubernetes [Gateway API Specification](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/). This specification defines a set of custom resource definitions (CRD) that can create logical gateways and routes based on the path or protocol of a client request. Consul API Gateway solves two primary use cases:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Consul API Gateway implements the Kubernetes [Gateway API Specification](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/). This specification defines a set of custom resource definitions (CRD) that can create logical gateways and routes based on the path or protocol of a client request. Consul API Gateway solves two primary use cases:
```

- **Controlling access at the point of entry**: Consul API Gateway allows users to set the protocols of external connection requests and provide clients with TLS certificates from trusted providers (e.g., Verisign, Let’s Encrypt).
- **Simplifying traffic management**: The Consul API Gateway can load balance requests across services and route traffic to the appropriate service by matching one or more criteria, such as hostname, path, header presence or value, and HTTP Method type (e.g., GET, POST, PATCH).

## Requirements

Your datacenter must meet the following requirements prior to configuring the Consul API Gateway:

- A Kubernetes cluster must be running

> - Consul 1.11.2+

Reviewer 6: I think we should state that the minimum helm chart version is 0.40.0. I know you show that in the example Helm install command below (line 54) but I think we should be more explicit than that.

## Installation

1. Issue the following command to install the Consul API Gateway controller:

```shell-session
$ kubectl apply --kustomize="github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/config/crd?ref=v0.1.0-beta"
```

1. Create a values file for your Consul server agents that contains the following parameters:

   <CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard filename="values.yaml">

   ```yaml

>    global:
>      name: consul
>      image: 'hashicorp/consul:1.11.2'
>      tls:
>        enabled: true
>    connectInject:
>      enabled: true
>    controller:
>      enabled: true

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
   global:
     name: consul
     image: 'hashicorp/consul:1.11.2'
     tls:
       enabled: true
   connectInject:
     enabled: true
   controller:
     enabled: true
   apiGateway:
     enabled: true
     image: hashicorp/consul-api-gateway:0.1.0-beta
```

Consul API Gateway is an implementation of the Kubernetes [Gateway API Specification](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/). This specification defines a set of custom resource definitions (CRD) that can create logical gateways and routes based on the path or protocol of a client request. Consul API Gateway solves two primary use cases:

- **Controlling access at the point of entry**: Consul API Gateway allows users to set the protocols of external connection requests and provide clients with TLS certificates from trusted providers (e.g., Verisign, Let’s Encrypt).
- **Simplifying traffic management**: The Consul API Gateway can load balance requests across services and route traffic to the appropriate service by matching one or more criteria, such as hostname, path, header presence or value, and HTTP Method type (e.g., GET, POST, PATCH).

## Requirements

Your datacenter must meet the following requirements prior to configuring the Consul API Gateway:

- A Kubernetes cluster must be running
- Consul 1.11.2+

## Installation

1. Create a values file for your Consul server agents that contains the following parameters:

<CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard filename="values.yaml">

> ```yaml

Reviewer 5: the values and the helm chart version will need to get updated

- [Routes](#routes): Specifies the path from the client to the listener.

### GatewayClass

The `GatewayClass` resource is used as a template for creating `Gateway` resources.
The specification includes the name of the controller (`controllerName`) and an API object containing controller-specific configuration resources within the cluster (`parametersRef`).
The value of the `controllerName` field must be set to `hashicorp.com/consul-api-gateway-controller`.

When gateways are created from a `GatewayClass`, they use the parameters specified in the `GatewayClass` at the time of instantiation.

Add the `kind: GatewayClass` option to the the gateway values file to declare a gateway class.
The following example creates a gateway class called `test-gateway-class`:

<CodeBlockConfig filename="gateway.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  name: test-gateway-class
spec:
  controllerName: 'hashicorp.com/consul-api-gateway-controller'
  parametersRef:
    group: api-gateway.consul.hashicorp.com
    kind: GatewayClassConfig
    name: test-gateway-class-config
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

> Refer to the Kubernetes Gateway API documentation for details about configuring gateway classes:
> <https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.GatewayClass>

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Refer to the [Kubernetes Gateway API documentation](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.GatewayClass) for details about configuring gateway classes.
```

| `image.envoy`                     | Specifies the container image to use for Envoy.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | String  | `"envoyproxy/envoy:v1.19-latest"`                |
| `logLevel`                        | Specifies the error reporting level for logs. You can specify the following values: `FATAL`, `ERROR`, `WARN`, `INFO`, `DEBUG`, `TRACE`, `ALL`, `OFF`.                                                                                                                                                                      | String  | `"info"`                                         |

> | `nodeSelector`                    | Specifies a set of parameters that constrain the nodes on which the pod can run. Defining nodes with the `nodeSelector` enables the pod to fit on a node. The selector must match a node's labels for the pod to be scheduled on that node. More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/assign-pod-node/ | Object  | N/A                                              |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| `nodeSelector`                    | Specifies a set of parameters that constrain the nodes on which the pod can run. Defining nodes with the `nodeSelector` enables the pod to fit on a node. The selector must match a node's labels for the pod to be scheduled on that node. For more info see the [Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/assign-pod-node/). | Object  | N/A                                              |
```

| `tls`                           | Collection of parameters that specify TLS options for the listener. Refer to the [`GatewayTLSConfig`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.GatewayTLSConfig) documentation for additional information about configuring TLS.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Object  | N/A             |

> | `tls.mode`                      | Specifies a mode for operating Consul API Gateway listeners over TLS. <br/>You can only specify the `Terminate` mode, which configures the TLS session between the downstream client and the gateway to terminate at the gateway. <br/>Refer to the [`TLSModeType` documentation](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.TLSModeType) for additional information.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | String  | `Terminate`     |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `tls.mode`                      | Specifies a mode for operating Consul API Gateway listeners over TLS. <br/>Only the `Terminate` mode is currently supported, which configures the TLS session between the downstream client and the gateway to terminate at the gateway. <br/>Refer to the [`TLSModeType` documentation](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.TLSModeType) for additional information.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | String  | `Terminate`     |
```
Rephrase to indicate that we do plan to support `Passthrough` mode eventually.

Author: Going to gently push back on the use of temporal language. I know we do this all over the place, but especially now that we have versioned docs, we can be more definitive in describing the functionality locked down for a specific version instead of hedging toward future support.

| `tls.options.tls_min_version`   | Specifies the minimum TLS version supported for the listener. The following values are supported: `TLS_AUTO`, `TLSv1_0`, `TLSv1_1`, `TLSv1_2`, `TLSv1_3`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | String  | `TLS 1.2`       |

> | `tls.options.tls_max_version"`  | Specifies the maximum TLS version supported for the listener. The specified version must be greater than or equal to `TLSMinVersion`. The following values are supported: `TLS_AUTO`, `TLSv1_0`, `TLSv1_1`, `TLSv1_2`, `TLSv1_3`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | String  | `TLS 1.3`       |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `tls.options.tls_max_version`  | Specifies the maximum TLS version supported for the listener. The specified version must be greater than or equal to `TLSMinVersion`. The following values are supported: `TLS_AUTO`, `TLSv1_0`, `TLSv1_1`, `TLSv1_2`, `TLSv1_3`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | String  | `TLS 1.3`       |
```

| `tls.options.tls_cipher_suites` | Specifies the list of TLS cipher suites to support when negotiating connections using TLS 1.2 or earlier. <br/>If unspecified, a [more secure set of cipher suites](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/blob/main/internal/common/tls.go#L3-L10) than Envoy's current [default server cipher list](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/extensions/transport_sockets/tls/v3/common.proto#envoy-v3-api-field-extensions-transport-sockets-tls-v3-tlsparameters-cipher-suites) will be used. <br/>The full list of supported cipher suites can seen in [`internal/common/tls.go`](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/blob/main/internal/common/tls.go) and is dependent on underlying support in Envoy. | String  | See description |

Refer to the Kubernetes Gateway API documentation for details about configuring listeners:
<https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.Listener>

### Route

Routes are independent configuration objects that are associated with specific listeners.

> Use the `kind: HTTPRoute` option to declare a route and use the `spec` option to specify the route details.

Reviewer 5: Was taking a look at the rendered docs https://consul-pwoutg7sw-hashicorp.vercel.app/docs/api-gateway and now have some more suggestions 😄 

Here I'd do something like:

```suggestion
Use the [`kind: HTTPRoute`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.HTTPRoute) or [`kind: TCPRoute`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.TCPRoute) option to declare a route and use the `spec` option to specify the route details.
```

You can learn more about using Consul API Gateway by completing the [Consul API Gateway tutorial](https://learn.hashicorp.com/tutorials/consul/kubernetes-api-gateway).

## Introduction

Consul API Gateway implements the Kubernetes [Gateway API Specification](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/). This specification defines a set of custom resource definitions (CRD) that can create logical gateways and routes based on the path or protocol of a client request. Consul API Gateway solves two primary use cases:

- **Controlling access at the point of entry**: Consul API Gateway allows users to set the protocols of external connection requests and provide clients with TLS certificates from trusted providers (e.g., Verisign, Let’s Encrypt).
- **Simplifying traffic management**: The Consul API Gateway can load balance requests across services and route traffic to the appropriate service by matching one or more criteria, such as hostname, path, header presence or value, and HTTP Method type (e.g., GET, POST, PATCH).

## Requirements

Your datacenter must meet the following requirements prior to configuring the Consul API Gateway:

> - A Kubernetes cluster must be running

Reviewer 7: Should we add `kubectl` version >= 1.21 here?

Reviewer 6: Yes.
